                                This book was created in memory of


                                       Mary Pavlatou
                              professional stage name: Mary Pavlatou
                               maiden name: Maria Metaxas Mariatou
                                    married name: Maria Pulos

                     Through newspaper clippings, photographs and
           historical notes, her life as a international celebrity fashion model
                    —most notably for the House of Christian Dior™—
                               is presented on these pages.

           Lovingly kept for decades by her three sons, each image has been
              carefully restored, translated and researched for accuracy.




                                       Photo and article compilation by
                                             The Pulos Brothers
                              Photo restoration, article restoration and book design by
                                                   Mary James


©2026 Pulos Brothers. All Rights Reserved. No part of this book may be copied or reprinted without author permission.
                                                 ISBN XXXXXXXXXX
         This book is dedicated to our mother, the one we call God's Special Angel.

   Maria Metaxas Mariatou was a Renaissance Woman in the true meaning of the word, far ahead of her
  time in many ways, for it was a different world for women (and others) back in those years. She was an
international celebrity fashion model appearing in Athens, Paris, Milan, New York, Chicago and elsewhere.
       She modeled fashions for Christian Dior, Hubert de Givenchy, Jacques Fath, Pierre Balmain,
     Nina Ricci and others. Maria's signature runway modeling music was the theme from the movie
        The Third Man, a world-wide musical hit. She was the First Greek Certified/Credentialed
               Professional Fashion Model, thus laying the foundation for others to follow.
      Aside from modeling and fashion, she was offered the opportunity of appearing in movies, on
  television, and on stage. She was also the recipient of numerous awards in dance, music, art, writing,
   oratory, academia and sports. She spoke several languages and earned advanced university degrees.
     Maria was a child hero of World War II. She caught the attention of Aristotle Onassis (seen in the
       company of Marilyn Monroe, Elizabeth Taylor and others) who later married Jackie Kennedy.
      The Metaxas Family was ennobled by the Venetian Empire in 1691 with the perpetual title of
      Count/Countess. The Metaxas Family also significantly affected the outcome of World War II,
      which played a great part in saving the world. Our mother made the world and the universe
           a much better place. She is the closest thing that will ever be to Heaven on earth.
   This book is dedicated to her loving memory. The one we call God's Sweetest Miracle. Eternal be her
        memory. May she be remembered forever. Thank you dear readers, may God bless you all.
From Yesterday’s Fashion Shows of The
House of Eleni Mallidou
The “Sopic” ensemble by Balmain, presented at the
Mallidou fashion show. A dress in pink-gray grosgrain,
featuring a draped bodice accented with an informal-
style necklace of the same pink-gray hue. It is
accompanied by a short jacket, its collar opening to
reveal a square inset of white draped fabric from the
dress beneath.




ΑΠΟ ΤΙΣ ΧΘΕΣΙΝΕΣ ΕΠΙΔΕΙΞΕΙΣ ΜΟΔΑΣ
ΤΟΥ ΟΙΚΟΥ ΕΛΕΝΗΣ ΜΑΛΛΙΔΟΥ

Τὸ σύνολο «Σόπικ» τοῦ Μπαλμαίν ἀπὸ τὶς ἐπιδείξεις
Μαλλίδου. Φόρεμα ἀπὸ ροζ-γκρό μὲ κορσάζ ἀπὸ
ντραπέ σουρὰ, γαρνιρισμένο μὲ κολιέ ἀνφόρμ ἀπὸ
τὸ ροζ-γκρό. Συνοδεύεται ἀπὸ μία ζακέτα ποὺ ὁ
γιακάς της ἀνοίγει καὶ ἀφήνει νὰ φαvῇ ἕνα τετράγωνο
πλαστροῦν ἀπὸ τὸ λευκὸ ντραπέ τοῦ φορέματος.




HISTORICAL NOTES
Οίκος Ελένης Μαλλίδου (“House of Eleni Mallidou”) refers to a Greek haute couture atelier active in Athens during the
1950s. Mallidou was known for showcasing French designers like Balmain and Dior, adapted for the Greek market.
Σόπικ (Sopic) is likely a misprint or phonetic transcription of “Sophie” or “Topic” — possibly the model name or the
collection title used by Balmain.
The term γκρό (gros) means grosgrain — a fine, ribbed fabric used for elegant structured dresses of that period.
The language retains the formal Katharevousa tone, but here the vocabulary leans toward French fashion terminology,
typical of 1950s Greek society columns.

                                                          1
MISS MARY PAVLATOU
And now we conclude today’s feature with the “apology,”
so to speak, of ETAM’s second mannequin, the charming
Miss Mary Pavlatou.
Miss Mary is a Greek-American graduate of the Patricia
Vance School of Fashion in Chicago. She began her career
as a mannequin with the renowned fashion house Vogue.
Miss Mary Pavlatou — one of the finest mannequins —
presents a most elegant daytime dress in organza. She has
participated and appeared many times in fashion exhibitions
and television presentations. She is the best-known
mannequin in Athens, and one of the very best.
“I am very pleased,” Miss Mary tells us, “but I also become
quite tired. My earnings here are relatively satisfactory,
though they do not leave me entirely fulfilled. For this
reason, I shall soon return to America."
Miss Mary has no obligations; she greatly enjoys dancing and
the cinema. Her dream is to become one of the world’s finest
mannequins and, one day, to create a good family.
(by G. K. Pilichos)




Η ΔΙΣ ΜΑΙΡΗ ΠΑΥΛΑΤΟΥ
Καὶ τώρα κλείνουμε τὴν σημερινὴ καμπάνια μας μὲ
τὴν… «ἀπολογία» τοῦ δευτέρου μανεκέν τῆς ΕΤΑΜ, τῆς
χαριτωμένης δεσποινίδος Μαίρης Παυλάτου.
Ἡ δις Μαίρη εἶναι Ἑλληνοαμερικανὶς ἀπόφοιτος τῆς σχολῆς
μόδας τῆς Patricia Wence τοῦ Σικάγου. Ἀρχισε τὴν καριέρα
της σὰν μανεκέν ἀπὸ τὸν μεγάλο οἶκο μόδας Vogue.
Ἡ δις Μαίρη Παυλάτου — ἕνα ἀπ’ τὰ καλύτερα μανεκέν —
λανσάρει ἕνα ὡραιότατο πρωινὸ φόρεμα ἀπὸ ὀργάντζα.
Ἔλαβε μέρος καὶ ἐμφανίσθηκε πολλές φορὲς σὲ ἐκθέσεις
μόδας ἀπὸ τὴν τηλεόρασιν. Εἶναι τὸ γνωστότερο μανεκέν
στὴν Ἀθήνα καὶ ἕνα ἀπὸ τὰ καλύτερα.
Ἡ δις Μαίρη δὲν ἔχει ὑποχρεώσεις· τῆς ἀρέσει πολὺ ὁ
χορός καὶ τὸ σινεμὰ. Τὸ ὄνειρό της εἶναι νὰ γίνῃ ἕνα ἀπὸ τὰ
καλύτερα μανεκέν τοῦ κόσμου καὶ κάποτε νὰ δημιουργήσῃ
μιὰ καλὴ οἰκογένεια.
Γ. Κ. ΠΙΛΙΧΟΣ


HISTORICAL NOTES
This article is a rare and valuable first-person-style profile typical of 1950s Greek fashion journalism. The
term μανεκέν (mannequin) reflects the era’s usage for professional fashion models. Miss Pavlatou’s Greek-
American background, formal fashion education in Chicago, and association with Vogue place her firmly
within the international fashion circuit of the postwar period — a bridge between Athens, Paris, and America.


                                                      2
                                                            As in the previous year, the Fur Company
                                                            “Halifa” presented, on Thursday and
                                                            Friday afternoon, in the grand ballroom
                                                            of the Hotel Grande Bretagne, its latest
                                                            collection of models. This fashion show
                                                            of “Haute Fourrure” (High Fur Fashion)
                                                            always finds great resonance among
                                                            women, who, as is well known, have a
                                                            particular fondness for such luxurious
                                                            accessories. Moreover, the manner in
                                                            which the House of “Halifa” presents its
                                                            collection is exceptionally charming, with
                                                            the refined tone of the great European
                                                            fashion salons. Accompanied by a softly
                                                            played piano that performed a series of
                                                            pleasant melodies, the models appeared
                                                            in two evening jackets in ermine, models
                                                            by “Halifa.”




                                                            Όπως και πέρυσι η Α.Ε. Γουναρικών
                                                            “Χάλιφας” παρουσίασε την Πέμπτην και
                                                            Παρασκευήν τὸ ἀπόγευμα στην μεγάλην
                                                            αἴθουσαν δεξιώσεων τοῦ ξενοδοχείου
                                                            τῆς “Μεγάλης Βρεταννίας” τὴν συλλογήν
                                                            τῶν τελευταίων μοντέλλων. Ἡ ἐπίδειξις
                                                            αὕτη τῆς “Οτ Φουρρούρ” ἔχει πάντοτε
                                                            μεγάλην ἀπήχησιν στὸν γυναικεῖον
                                                            κόσμον, ὁ ὁποῖος ὡς γνωστόν τρέφει
                                                            ἰδιαιτέραν ἀδυναμίαν στὰ πολυτελῆ
                                                            αὐτὰ ἐξαρτήματα. Καὶ ὁ τρόπος ὅμως
                                                            ποὺ ὁ Οἶκος “Χάλιφας” παρουσιάζει τὴν
                                                            συλλογήν εἶναι ὁμολογουμένως πολὺ
                                                            εὐχάριστος καὶ ἔχει τόνον εὐρωπαϊκῶν
                                                            ἐπιδείξεων. Ὑπὸ τὴν συνοδείαν πιάνου,
                                                            ποὺ ἔπαιξε συμπαθητικὰ καὶ σιγανά
Caption                                                     διάφορα κομμάτια, ξεπρόβαλαν ποὺ άύο
Two evening jackets in ermine, models by “Halifa.”          ζακέττες κατὰ βραδυνές ἀπὸ ἐρμινέττα,
                                                            μοντέλλα “Χάλιφας”.
Δύο ζακέττες κατὰ βραδυνές ἀπὸ ἐρμινέττα,
μοντέλλα “Χάλιφας”.




HISTORICAL NOTES
The Halifa Fur House was one of Athens’ most prestigious fashion ateliers of the 1950s, renowned for its
haute fourrure — luxurious fur creations inspired by Parisian couture houses. The Hotel Grande Bretagne
often hosted these high-society fashion events, where elegant music, poised models, and refined
presentation combined to reflect Greece’s growing cosmopolitan identity in postwar Europe.

                                                      4
    Summer Fashion Show
    A model from yesterday’s summer fashion show by the House of Tsitsopoulos, held at the
    “King George” Hotel.


    ΕΠΙΔΕΙΞΙΣ ΚΑΛΟΚΑΙΡΙΝΩΝ ΜΟΝΤΕΛΛΩΝ
    Δύο μοντέλλα ἀπὸ τὴν χθεσινὴν ἐπίδειξιν θερινῆς μόδας τοῦ οἴκου Τσιτσοπούλου εἰς τὸ
    ξενοδοχεῖον «Βασιλεὺς Γεώργιος».

HISTORICAL NOTES
The King George Hotel, adjacent to Syntagma Square, was a favored venue for high-society fashion
presentations in postwar Athens, often hosting couture and ready-to-wear collections during the spring and
summer seasons.

                                                     5
 Left: A charming little hat shown at a recent winter exhibition in London. It imitates men’s caps
 of the fifteenth century. The fabric is gathered at the side, falls to the neck, covers the ear, and
 ends in a fringe. Right: A modern cap-style hat made of recent-season felt, trimmed with a black
 velvet ribbon and a black veil.
 The Last Word in Fashion Hats of 1953




 Ἀριστερά: Ἕνα χαριτωμένο καπελλάκι ποὺ ἐπεδείχθη σὲ μία πρόσφατη χειμερινὴ ἔκθεσι
 τοῦ Λονδίνου. Ἀπομιμεῖται τὰ ἀνδρικὰ σκουφιά τοῦ δεκάτου πέμπτου αἰῶνος. Τὸ ὕφασμα
 μαζεύεται στὸ πλάι, πέφτει ὡς τὸ λαιμό, σκεπάζει τὸ αὐτί καὶ καταλήγει σὲ φράντζα. Δεξιά:
 Μοντέρνο καπελλάκι σὲ στὺλ σκουφιάς ἀπὸ πρόσφατη φέτα μελσίνης, γαρνιρισμένο μὲ
 μαύρη βελούδινη κορδέλλα καὶ μαύρο βέλο.
 Η ΤΕΛΕΥΤΑΙΑ ΛΕΞΙΣ ΤΗΣ ΜΟΔΑΣ
 ΤΑ ΚΑΠΕΛΛΑ ΤΟΥ 1953


HISTORICAL NOTES
Millinery played a central role in early 1950s fashion, with London and Paris setting trends that quickly
reached Athens. These designs reflect both historical revival and modern elegance, characteristic of postwar
European style.

                                                      6
Women’s Fashion Shows
Two photographs from the fashion show of the couture house Stantzos, presented
during yesterday’s reception of the Council of Greek Women at the Attic Club.




ΕΠΙΔΕΙΞΕΙΣ ΓΥΝΑΙΚΕΙΑΣ ΜΟΔΑΣ
Δύο φωτογραφίαι ἀπὸ τὴν ἐπίδειξιν μόδας τοῦ ραπτικοῦ οἴκου Στάντζου κατὰ τὴν
χθεσινὴν δεξίωσιν τοῦ Συμβουλίου Ἑλληνίδων εἰς τὸν Ἀττικὸν Ὅμιλον.




                                        7
From Yesterday’s Presentation of Ready-to-Wear Dresses by the House of
ETAM at the “Grande Bretagne”
Yesterday, at the “Grande Bretagne” Hotel, a presentation of ready-to-wear dresses by the House
of ETAM was held. Some of the dresses shown.




ΑΠΟ ΤΗΝ ΧΘΕΣΙΝΗΝ ΕΠΙΔΕΙΞΙΝ ΕΤΟΙΜΩΝ ΦΟΡΕΜΑΤΩΝ ΤΟΥ ΟΙΚΟΥ
«ΕΤΑΜ» ΕΙΣ ΤΗΝ «ΜΕΓ. ΒΡΕΤΑΝΝΙΑΝ»
Εἰς τὸ ξενοδοχεῖον τῆς «Μεγ. Βρεταννίας» ἔγινε χθὲς ἐπίδειξις ἐτοίμων φορεμάτων τοῦ
Οἴκου «Ἐτάμ». Μερικὰ ἀπὸ τὰ ἐπιδειχθέντα φορέματα.




                                               8
9
                                                                      Fashion – Couturières
                                                                      …that most of the girls who work in
                                                                      couture ateliers are young girls — and
                                                                      this is for economic reasons.
                                                                      Mr. Petropoulos, president of the
                                                                      Seamstresses’ Union, was kind enough
                                                                      to enlighten me on all related matters.
                                                                      First of all, it is not easy for a
                                                                      young woman to enter an atelier.
                                                                      The Ministry of Labor attempts to
                                                                      impose a certain order. That is, when
                                                                      a young woman wishes to work as
                                                                      an assistant in an atelier, she must
                                                                      submit an application to the Ministry
                                                                      of Labor, which in turn assigns her
                                                                      to a workshop where there is need.
                                                                      The law stipulates that the minimum
                                                                      daily wage for girls under eighteen
                                                                      is ten drachmas, while for those over
                                                                      eighteen the minimum daily wage is
                                                                      twenty-nine drachmas, regardless of
                                                                      experience. You can see how easily
                                                                      the tendency to hire very young
                                                                      girls is explained. And even when a
                                                                      girl follows the Ministry of Labor’s
                                                                      procedure and is hired by an atelier,
                                                                      she must then be registered with
                                                                      IKA (Social Insurance), labor unions,
                                                                      etc., which burdens employers with
                                                                      an additional 30–32% on top of the
                                                                      daily wage. But that is another matter,
                                                                      unrelated to our own subject.




ΜΟΔΑ – ΜΟΔΙΣΤΡΕΣ
Ἀριστερά: Ἕνα χαριτωμένο καπελλάκι ποὺ ἐπεδείχθη σὲ μία πρόσφατη χειμερινὴ ἔκθεσι τοῦ
Λονδίνου. Ἀπομιμεῖται τὰ ἀνδρικὰ σκουφιά τοῦ δεκάτου πέμπτου αἰῶνος. Τὸ ὕφασμα μαζεύεται
στὸ πλάι, πέφτει ὡς τὸ λαιμό, σκεπάζει τὸ αὐτί καὶ καταλήγει σὲ φράντζα. Δεξιά: Μοντέρνο
καπελλάκι σὲ στὺλ σκουφιάς ἀπὸ πρόσφατη φέτα μελσίνης, γαρνιρισμένο μὲ μαύρη βελούδινη
κορδέλλα καὶ μαύρο βέλο.



HISTORICAL NOTES
Beneath the glamour of postwar fashion shows and couture salons lay a structured, often unseen world
of labor, regulation, and economic reality. This fragment from a 1950s fashion column offers a rare glimpse
behind the curtain, revealing how the beauty of Athenian couture was sustained by young women entering
ateliers through state oversight, modest wages, and formal apprenticeship systems. While the runway
celebrated refinement and international influence, the daily life of the atelier reflected discipline, hierarchy,
and resilience — a reminder that elegance was not only designed, but carefully built, stitch by stitch, by
hands rarely acknowledged in print.

                                                        10
                                                               WOMEN AND LIFE
                                                               The Hats of the House
                                                               of Efstathiadou at the
                                                               Tsamadou Fashion Show
                                                               In recent years it has become
                                                               customary for major couture
                                                               houses to present dress models
                                                               in combination with hats. At
                                                               times, a dress design is admired
                                                               precisely because of the hat that
                                                               accompanies it.
                                                               At the Tsamadou fashion show, the
                                                               hats of the House of Efstathiadou
                                                               were presented with notable
                                                               success. One ensemble featured
                                                               a black tulle hat, trimmed with
                                                               four rows of pleated tulle bows
                                                               and a matching bow in black and
                                                               gray silk, harmonizing beautifully
                                                               with the dress — a phôt model.
                                                               Among the hats shown, we note in
                                                               particular a gray felt hat…




                                                               ΓΥΝΑΙΚΑ ΚΑΙ ΖΩΗ
                                                               Τα καπέλλα οἴκου Εὐσταθιάδου
                                                               στην ἐπίδειξι μόδας Τσαμαδοῦ
                                                               Ἐπικρατεῖ τὰ τελευταῖα ἔτη εἰς
                                                               τὰ μεγάλα ῥαπτικὰ σπίτια νὰ
                                                               ἐπιδεικνύωνται τὰ μοντέλλα τῶν
Caption                                                        φορεμάτων εἰς συνδυασμὸν μετὰ
Hat by the House of Efstathiadou, a model by Christian Dior.   καπελλῶν. Συμβαίνει δὲ πολλάκις
A gray straw hat, dressed with black tulle and a cyclamen-     νὰ θαυμάζηται ἓν σχέδιον
colored bow patterned with fine square polka dots. The         φορέματος ἀκριβῶς χάρις εἰς τὸ
rounded crown is finished with pleated detailing.              καπέλλον, ὅπερ τὸ συνοδεύει.
                                                               Κατὰ τὴν ἐπίδειξιν μόδας
Καπέλλο τοῦ οἴκου Εὐσταθιάδη, μοντέλο τοῦ Κριστιάν Ντιόρ.      Τσαμαδοῦ, τὰ καπέλλα τοῦ
Γκρὶ καπέλλο ἀπὸ ψάθα, ντυμένη μὲ τούλι μαύρο, μὲ σουκλαμέν    οἴκου Εὐσταθιάδου ἐσημείωσαν
φιόγκον ποὺ ἔχει λεπτὰ τετράγωνα πουά. Ἡ ἴδια στρογγυλὴ        ἰδιαιτέραν ἐπιτυχίαν. Ἐκ τῶν
καλύπτρα εἶναι δουλεμένη μὲ μανσετέδες.                        ἐκθεμάτων ἐξεχώρισεν καπέλλον
                                                               ἐκ μαύρου τοῦλι, γαρνιρισμένον
                                                               μὲ τέσσαρας σειρὰς σουρᾶς
                                                               ἐκ μαύρου τοῦλι, καθὼς καὶ
                                                               μὲ ἕνα φιόγγον ἐκ μεταξωτοῦ
                                                               ὑφάσματος εἰς τόνους μαύρου καὶ
                                                               γκρι, ἐναρμονιζόμενον ἀρίστως
                                                               πρὸς τὸ φόρεμα, μοντέλλον φωτ.


                                                12
Fashion Without Extremes
Respect for Proportion
Fresh Daywear — Light Outerwear
Drawing on the finest traditions of her fashion
house and years of couture experience, Mrs.
Philippou presents a thoroughly modern spring and
summer collection defined by restraint and balance.
Free of excess and exaggeration, the designs
emphasize proportion, freshness, and wearable
elegance, offering refined daywear and light outer
garments for the contemporary woman.




ΜΟΔΑ ΧΩΡΙΣ ΑΚΡΟΤΗΤΕΣ
ΣΕΒΑΣΜΟΣ ΣΤΙΣ ΑΝΑΛΟΓΙΕΣ
ΔΡΟΣΕΡΑ ΠΡΩΪΝΑ — ΠΑΝΩΦΟΡΙΑ
Ἀντλώντας ἀπὸ τὶς καλὺτερες παραδόσεις τοῦ
οἴκου της καὶ τὴν πολυετῆ ἐμπειρία της στὴν
ὑψηλὴ ῥαπτική, ἡ κ. Φιλίππου παρουσιάζει μία
ἐντελῶς μοντέρνα συλλογὴ ἀνοιξιάτικης καὶ
θερινῆς μόδας, χαρακτηριζόμενη ἀπὸ μέτρο καὶ
ἰσορροπία. Χωρὶς ἀκρότητες καὶ ὑπερβολές, τὰ
μοντέλλα δίνουν ἔμφαση στὶς σωστὲς ἀναλογίες,
τὴ φρεσκάδα καὶ τὴν κομψὴ φορεσιμότητα,
προτείνοντας καλαίσθητα πρωινὰ σύνολα καὶ
ἐλαφρὰ πανωφόρια γιὰ τὴ σύγχρονη γυναῖκα.




HISTORICAL NOTES
This heading reflects a core aesthetic principle of early-
1950s Greek couture: restraint, balance, and elegance
over excess. The emphasis on proportion and freshness
signals a shift toward wearable sophistication — fashion
designed for real life, not spectacle — perfectly in tune
with the postwar desire for refinement and renewal.



                                                       13
One of the charming dresses recently
presented by the House of the
Tsitsopoulos Brothers at their spring
exhibition.



Ἕνα ἀπὸ τὰ χαριτωμένα φορέματα
ποὺ παρουσίασε προσφάτως ὁ οἶκος
«Ἀδελφοὶ Τσιτσόπουλοι» εἰς τὴν
ἀνοιξιάτικην ἔκθεσίν του.




                              Miss Pavlatou presents this elegant coat,
                              made from modern mohair fabric.

                              Ἡ δὶς Παυλάτου σᾶς παρουσιάζει τὸ ὡραῖο
                              αὐτὸ παλτὸ ἀπὸ μοντέρνο ὕφασμα mohair.


                                 14
      Four hat models from those exhibited at the Hotel “M. Vretannia” (Grande Bretagne).



   Τέσσερα μοντέλα καπέλλων ἀπὸ τὰ ἐπιδειχθέντα στὸ ξενοδοχεῖον τῆς «Μ. Βρεταννίας».




HISTORICAL NOTES
«Μ. Βρεταννίας»: Abbreviation for Μεγάλης Βρεταννίας — the Hotel Grande Bretagne in Athens, one of
the most prestigious venues in mid-20th-century Greek society.

Fashion events at the Grande Bretagne were associated with elite clientele and international (especially
Parisian) influence.



                                                      15
                                                      The Fashion Show of the
                                                      House of E. Mallidis
                                                      I had the opportunity to attend
                                                      the model exhibition of Mrs. Eleni
                                                      Mallidis. Two exceptionally beautiful
                                                      mannequins, Miss Mary Pavlatou and
                                                      Miss Marina, presented with great
                                                      elegance the admirable Parisian-
                                                      inspired models.
                                                      I was particularly impressed by
                                                      the tailored suits made from
                                                      exceptionally fine fabrics. The
                                                      santouni fabrics stood out — light
                                                      and airy. Mrs. Mallidis makes use of
                                                      linen, alpaca, natté, and gris fabrics.




                                                      Η ΕΠΙΔΕΙΞΙΣ ΜΟΝΤΕΛΛΩΝ
                                                      ΤΟΥ ΟΙΚΟΥ Ε. ΜΑΛΛΙΔΗ
                                                      Εἶχον τὴν εὐκαιρίαν νὰ παραστῶ
                                                      εἰς τὴν ἔκθεσιν μοντέλλων τῆς
                                                      δεσποινίδος Ἑλένης Μαλλίδη.
                                                      Δύο ἐξαιρέτως ὡραῖα μανεκέν,
                                                      ἡ κ. Μαίρη Παυλάτου καὶ ἡ δὶς
                                                      Μαρίνα, παρουσίασαν μὲ πολλὴν
                                                      κομψότητα τὰ θαυμάσια Παρισινὰ
                                                      μοντέλλα.
                                                      Ἰδιαιτέρως ἐθαύμασα τὰ ταγέρ ἀπὸ
                                                      ἐξαιρετικὰ ὑφάσματα. Ὑπερεῖχον
Caption                                               τὰ «σαντοῦνι» καὶ τὰ γκρὸ, ἐλαφρά
BALMAIN: One of the most characteristic dresses —     καὶ μεταξωτά. Ἡ κ. Μαλλίδη
blue-and-white taffeta. A blue taffeta belt forms a   χρησιμοποιεῖ τὸ λινὸν, τὸν ἀλπακᾶν,
corseted waist.                                       τὸ νταμά καὶ τὰ γκρὸ. Ἕν ἀπὸ τὰ πιὸ
                                                      ὡραῖα δημιουργήματα…
ΜΠΑΛΜΑΙΝ: Ἀπὸ τὰ πιὸ χαρακτηριστικὰ
φορέματα· ταφτὰς μπλὲ-ἄσπρος. Ζώνη ἀπὸ μπλὲ
ταφτὰ σχηματίζει «κορσέλλαν».




                                                16
18
“Careful Change”
Sunday, October 12, 1952
From the fur fashion show of the House of Halifa at the Hotel Grande
Bretagne.Three models wearing richly luxurious furs.

«Προσεκτική Ἀλλαγή»
Κυριακή, 12 Ὀκτωβρίου 1952
«Ἀπὸ τὰς ἐπιδείξεις γουναρικῶν τοῦ Οἴκου Χάλιφα εἰς τὸ ξενοδοχεῖον τῆς
“Μεγ. Βρεταννίας”. Τρία μοντέλλα μὲ βαρυτίμα γουναρικά.»


                                    19
20
The Spring Fashion Show of Miss Eleni Mallidou
By Mrs. Georgia Deligianni–Anastasiadis
Miss Eleni Mallidou plays the game of fashion along the scale of freshness and youth.
She directs her attention to whatever highlights a woman’s grace and elegance, carefully
avoiding any excess that might exceed the strict boundaries of refined good taste.
She adopts a cheerful note — sometimes as the playful accent of a delicate detail, at other
times as an unexpected, luminous flourish. She favors cuts that create visual illusions,
tailoring that enhances stature, and trims that feel fresh without becoming heavy.
Her preferences lean toward Geneviève Fath and Pierre Balmain. And we saw their most
elegant models, executed with technical mastery and presented with the discreet elegance
of Miss Marina and the effortless poise of Mary Pavlatou.
This year, Miss Mallidou presented a wealth of delightfully fresh designs: chic ensembles,
joyful poplins and cottons, solids and stripes, modern checks inspired by Cardin, Balmain,
Dior, Lanvin, Maggy Rouff, and rendered in citron, rose, and sea-blue tones.
Among the most beautiful was Dior’s “Muguet”: a turquoise poplin with broad floral printed
stripes and a grey-turquoise trim framing the square neckline. Equally striking was a skirt
of emerald poplin with narrow pleats and a front-crossed draped belt, worn with a white
blouse and a charming hat.
As were all the hats accompanying the collection — creations of Mrs. Maria Archontaki-
Kallieni — crafted with great skill and exceptional imagination.




Ἡ ἈΝΟΙΞΙΑΤΙΚΗ ἘΠΙΔΕΙΞΙΣ ΤΗΣ ΔΟΣ. ἙΛΕΝΗΣ ΜΑΛΛΙΔΟΥ
Ἡ δεσποινὶς Ἑλένη Μαλλίδου παίζει τὸ παιγνίδι τῆς μόδας ἐπάνω εἰς τὴν κλίμακα τῆς δροσιᾶς
καὶ τῆς νεανικότητος. Στρέφει τὴν προσοχὴν της εἰς ὅ,τι θὰ ἀναδείξῃ τὴν χάριν καὶ τὴν
κομψότητα τῆς γυναικός καὶ ἀποφεύγει πᾶσαν ὑπερβολὴν ποὺ ὑπερβαίνει τὰ ὅρια τοῦ αὐστηροῦ
καλαισθήτου μέτρου.
Υἱοθετεῖ τὴν χαρούμενην νόταν, ἄλλοτε ὡς παιγνίδισμα μιᾶς λεπτῆς λεπτομερείας, ἄλλοτε ὡς
μίαν ἀπροσδόκητον φωτεινὴν πινελιάν. Ἀγαπᾷ τὸ κόψιμον ποὺ δημιουργεῖ ὀφθαλμαπάτας, τὴν
ἐπένδυσιν ποὺ χαρίζει ἀνάστημα, τὴν γαρνιτοῦραν ποὺ εἶναι φρέσκια ἀλλ᾿ οὐχὶ βαρεῖα.
Ἡ προτίμησίς της στρέφεται εἰς τὸ Ζενεβιὲβ Φάτ καὶ τὸν Πιερ Μπαλμαίν. Καὶ εἴδομεν τὰ
κομψότερα μοντέλλα των, εἰς τεχνικωτάτας ἐκτελέσεις, παρουσιαζόμενα μὲ τὴν διακριτικὴν
κομψότητα τῆς κ. Μαρίνας καὶ τὸν ἀέρα τῆς Μαίρης Παυλάτου.
Ἡ δεσποινὶς Μαλλίδου παρουσίασεν ἐφέτος πλῆθος ὁλοδρόσων μοντέλλων: ἐμπουτίκ,
χαρούμενας ποπλίνες καὶ κοτονᾶτ, μονόχρωμα καὶ ῥιγέ, εἰς μοντέρνα καρό Καρδέν, Μπαλμαίν,
Ντιορ, Λανβέν, Μανγκύ Ρουφ, καὶ εἰς χρώματα σιτρὸν, ῥοζ, θαλασσί.
Ἐκ τῶν ὡραιοτέρων ἦτο τὸ «Μυγκέ» τοῦ Ντιορ: μία τυρκουὰζ ποπλίνα μὲ φαρδεῖες ἄνθινες
ἐμπριμέ ῥίγες καὶ γκρὶ τυρκουὰζ γαλόνι εἰς τὸ τετράγωνον ντεκολτέ. Ὑπέροχος ἦτο καὶ
μία φούστα ἐκ σμαραγδίᾳ ποπλίνας μὲ στενὰς πιέττας καὶ ζώνην σχηματίζουσαν ἐμπρός
σταυρωτὸν ντραπέ, φορουμένη μὲ λευκὸν μπλουζάκι καὶ χαριτωμένον καπέλλον.
Ὅπως καὶ ὅλα τὰ καπέλλα ποὺ συνώδευσαν τὰ μοντέλλα τῆς κ. Μαρίας Ἀρχοντάκη – Καλλιένη,
δουλεμένα μὲ πολλὴν τέχνην καὶ ἐξαιρετικὴν φαντασίαν.




                                             21
MARY PAVLATOU
A celebrated fashion model
who leaves a strong impression
at fashion shows.
The remarkable success achieved by
Miss Mary Pavlatou in the recent fashion
presentations of the houses of Stantzos and
Filioskos prompted us to seek out the secret
behind this success.




ΜΑΙΡΗ ΠΑΥΛΑΤΟΥ
Ἕνα περίφημον μανεκέν ποὺ
προκαλεῖ ἐντύπωσιν στὶς
ἐπιδείξεις μόδας.
Ἡ καταπληκτικὴ ἐπιτυχία ποὺ
σημείωσε ἡ δὶς Μαίρη Παυλάτου στὶς
πρόσφατες ἐπιδείξεις μόδας τῶν οἴκων
Στάντζου καὶ Φιλιόσκου, μᾶς ὤθησε νὰ
ἀναζητήσουμε τὸ μυστικὸ αὐτῆς τῆς
ἐπιτυχίας.




  HISTORICAL NOTES
  Mary Pavlatou appears repeatedly across 1950s Greek fashion coverage, marking her as one of the most
  visible professional mannequins of the era.
  This article illustrates the shift from anonymous modeling to personality-driven fashion figures, a trend
  influenced by American fashion culture.
  The focus on “the secret of success” mirrors contemporaneous interest in professional technique,
  posture, and presence, not merely beauty.
  The photograph’s pose and garment suggest a tailored day ensemble, emphasizing structure and
  authority — consistent with postwar femininity ideals.


                                                     22
                                                  Caption
                                                  “A sample from the models of the Tsitsopoulos
                                                  fashion house.”
                                                  «Ἕνα δείγμα ἀπὸ τὰ μοντέλλα τοῦ οἴκου
                                                  Τσιτσοπούλου»



                                                  HISTORICAL NOTES
                                                  Short captions like this were typical of mid-century
                                                  Greek newspapers, which prioritized visual elegance over
                                                  technical description when space was limited.
                                                  The photograph’s styling — full skirt, structured bodice,
                                                  floral or textured surface — aligns with early-to-mid-1950s
                                                  Paris-influenced couture, adapted by Greek ateliers for
                                                  local clientele.
                                                  The Tsitsopoulos house frequently appeared in newspapers
                                                  as a marker of Athenian high fashion, especially in society
                                                  columns and illustrated fashion pages.




Caption
Evening gown by the Filisakos fashion house.

Βραδυνὴ τουαλέτα τοῦ Οἴκου Φιλισάκου.


HISTORICAL NOTES
Such captions were commonly used beneath photographs of
formal couture pieces, especially eveningwear, which was
considered the pinnacle of a fashion house’s skill.
The full skirt and structured bodice suggest early-to-mid 1950s
haute couture influence, echoing Parisian evening silhouettes
adapted for Greek society events.
Evening gowns were frequently highlighted independently of
full articles, signaling prestige and visual impact rather than
commercial wear.




                                                     24
In the halls of the Grande Bretagne Hotel, an interesting exhibition of models by the Etam fashion
house was held the day before yesterday.
In the photograph, two mannequins display pajamas: one consisting of trousers and a quilted
matelassé jacket in a “truck-car” pattern, and the other of a quilted satin matelassé jacket with a
Russian-style collar.



Εἰς τὰς αἰθούσας τοῦ ξενοδοχείου τῆς Μεγ. Βρεταννίας ὠργανώθη προχθές ἐνδιαφέρουσα
ἔκθεσις τῶν μοντέλλων τῆς Ἐτάμ.
Εἰς τὴν φωτογραφίαν δύο μανεκέν ἐπιδεικνύουν πιτζάμες· ἡ μία ἐκ τῶν ὁποίων ἀποτελεῖται
ἀπὸ παντελόνι καὶ ζακέτα τροὺκ καρ ματελασέ καὶ ἡ ἄλλη ἀπὸ ζακέτα ἀπὸ σατέν ματελασέ μὲ
γιακὰ ῥωσικό.

HISTORICAL NOTES
Etam, a French fashion house founded in 1916, was internationally recognized for refined lingerie,
homewear, and later prêt-à-porter; its presence in Athens reflects Greece’s close stylistic alignment
with Paris.
The choice of pajama-style ensembles underscores a mid-century trend: elevating domestic attire into
fashionable, socially acceptable clothing.
Hosting such an exhibition at the Grande Bretagne Hotel situates the event firmly within Athens’
elite social calendar.
The combination of French textile terminology with Greek grammatical structure is characteristic
of Greek fashion journalism of the 1950s.

                                                    25
Caption
Miss Pavlatou modeling a magnificent evening gown in the American style.
Ἡ δὶς Παυλάτου ἐπιδεικνύουσα μίαν θαυμασίαν βραδυνὴν τουαλέτταν σὲ ἀμερικανικὴ γραμμήν.



                                               26
BEAUTIFUL — AND WITH LITTLE MONEY
After a three-year absence in America, the well-known Greek-American mannequin Miss Mary
Pavlatou has returned to Athens. She will present the Autumn and Winter 1955–56 models,
works by some of the largest haute couture houses in Athens. Specifically, Miss Pavlatou will
show creations by the fashion houses of Stantzos, Zorzette, Filioskos, Tsouchlos, Mallidos,
Archontakis, Halifas, and others.
Miss Pavlatou brings with her vivid impressions from the presentations of the new fashion
in America, where she participated in shows presenting models from many of the greatest
couture houses — such as those of the major department stores on Fifth Avenue, in
Hollywood, and elsewhere.
We therefore asked her to speak to us about American fashion.
— American fashion, she told us, is far simpler than fashion in Europe. The lines are similar,
but much more streamlined, and one can present a very fine appearance with far less money
than is required here.
In American fashion there exists the following difference: many dresses follow the same style,
yet the American woman has the gift of wearing a dress that has been seen many times before
and making it appear different through the accessories she changes.
She is greatly aided in this by her carefully maintained figure — something not easily found
in Europe.



ΩΡΑΙΑ ΚΑΙ ΜΕ ΛΙΓΑ ΧΡΗΜΑΤΑ
Ύστερα ἀπὸ τριῶν ἐτῶν ἀπουσίαν στὴν Ἀμερικήν, ἐπανεγύρισε στὰς Ἀθήνας ἡ γνωστὴ
Ἑλληνοαμερικανὶς μανεκέν δὶς Μαίρη Παυλάτου, ποὺ θὰ παρουσιάσῃ τὰ φθινοπωρινὰ καὶ χειμερινὰ
μοντέλλα 1955–56, σὲ ἔργα ἀπὸ τὰ μεγαλύτερα σπίτια μεγάλης μόδας τῶν Ἀθηνῶν. Συγκεκριμένως
ἡ δὶς Παυλάτου θὰ δείξῃ τὰ μοντέλλα τῶν οἴκων Στάντζου, Ζορζέτ, Φιλιόσκου, Τσούχλου,
Μαλλίδου, Ἀρχοντάκη, Χάλιφα καὶ ἄλλων.
Ἡ δὶς Παυλάτου ἔχει πολὺ ζωηρὰς τὰς ἐντυπώσεις ἀπὸ τὰς ἐπιδείξεις τῆς νέας μόδας στὴν Ἀμερικήν,
ὅπου ἔλαβε μέρος, δείχνοντας τὰ μοντέλλα πλείστων ἐκ τῶν μεγαλυτέρων ραπτικῶν οἴκων, ὅπως
π.χ. τῶν μεγάλων καταστημάτων στὴν Πέμπτην Λεωφόρον, στὴν Χολιγουντ καὶ ἄλλων.
Τῆς ζητήσαμε λοιπόν νὰ μᾶς μιλήσῃ γιὰ τὴν ἀμερικανικὴ μόδα.
— Ἡ ἀμερικανικὴ μόδα, μᾶς εἶπε, εἶναι πολὺ πιὸ ἀπλὴ ἀπ’ ὅ,τι εἶναι ἡ μόδα στὴν Εὐρώπη. Οἱ γραμμὲς
εἶναι ἴδιες ἀλλὰ πολὺ πιὸ ἀπλουστευμένες, καὶ μπορεῖς νὰ παρουσιάσῃς μίαν πολὺ καλὴν ἐμφάνισιν
μὲ πολὺ λιγώτερα χρήματα ἀπ’ ὅ,τι μπορεῖς ἐδῶ.
Στὴν ἀμερικανικὴ μόδα ὑπάρχει ἡ ἑξῆς διαφορά· πολλὰ φορέματα εἶναι στὴν ἴδια μόδα, ἀλλὰ ἡ
Ἀμερικανὶς ἔχει τὸ χάρισμα νὰ φορῇ ἕνα φόρεμα ποὺ ἔχει κοπῆ πολλὲς φορὲς καὶ νὰ τὸ δείχνῃ
διαφορετικὸ χάρις στὰ ἀξεσουάρ ποὺ ἀλλάζει.
Σ’ αὐτὸ τὴ βοηθεῖ ἐξαιρετικῶς καὶ τὸ πολὺ προσεγμένο σῶμα, ποὺ δὲν μπορεῖς νὰ τὸ βρῇς εὔκολα
στὴν Εὐρώπη.

HISTORICAL NOTES
This article captures a moment when American fashion ideals were beginning to influence Greek urban
style, particularly among middle- and upper-class women.
References to Fifth Avenue and Hollywood highlight America as both a commercial and aspirational
fashion authority.
The emphasis on affordability reflects postwar economic realities in Greece, where elegance needed to
coexist with restraint.
Mary Pavlatou emerges not only as a model but as a fashion mediator between America and Greece.

                                               27
 One of the successes of the collection of the
 Tsitsopoulos Brothers’ stores, which was
 presented the day before yesterday at the
 King George [Hotel].




 Μιὰ ἀπὸ τὶς ἐπιτυχίες τῆς συλλογῆς τῶν
 καταστημάτων Ἀφοὶ Τσιτσόπουλοι, ποὺ
 ἐπιδείχθη χθὲς προχθὲς εἰς τὸ Κίνγκ Τζώρτζ.




 HISTORICAL NOTES
 The King George Hotel, located in Syntagma Square,
 was a symbolic site of post-war elegance and
 international aspiration in Athens.
 Mentions like this indicate that Greek fashion houses
 and retailers staged shows in luxury hotels, mirroring
 Parisian and American presentation models.
 The phrasing “μία ἀπὸ τὶς ἐπιτυχίες” subtly
 frames the garment as a highlight rather than
 merely an example—an early form of promotional
 fashion journalism.
 Such captions often accompanied daywear or cocktail
 ensembles, suggesting commercial success rather
 than haute couture exclusivity.




28
     A Balmain model in white printed brocade
     with softly colored cyclamen and gray
     flowers.
     The pleating is gathered with diagonal
     draping toward the sides.
     A belt at the waist is tied at the front into
     a bow.
     The draping at the bodice is secured
     with a narrow band, which also holds
     the shoulder straps.
     The dress is accompanied by a bolero jacket.




     Μοντέλο τοῦ Μπαλμαίν ἀπὸ λευκὸ ἐμπριμέ
     μπροσέ μὲ ἀπαλόχρωμα συκλαμὲν καὶ γκρὶ
     λουλούδια.
     Τὸ πλιτσάρισμα συγκεντρώνεται μὲ λοξὰ
     ντραπέ πρὸς τὰ πλάγια.
     Ζώνη στὴ μέση δεμένη ἐμπρὸς σὲ φιόγκο.
     Τὸ ντραπέ στὸ στῆθος πιάνεται μὲ στενὴ
     φάσα, ποὺ συγκρατεῖ καὶ τὶς μπετέλλες.
     Τὸ φόρεμα συνοδεύεται μπολερό.




     HISTORICAL NOTES
     This caption reflects high couture literacy among
     Greek readers in the 1950s, who were expected to
     understand French fashion vocabulary.
     The detailed technical description (pleating
     direction, draping mechanics, structural bands)
     suggests an audience of dressmakers, couturières,
     and fashion-conscious women, not merely
     spectators.
     Balmain’s emphasis on structure + softness
     (defined waist, controlled draping, floral delicacy)
     aligns with postwar Paris couture aesthetics.
     The inclusion of a bolero reflects the era’s
     preference for adaptable ensembles, suitable for
     both formal and semi-formal occasions.




30
Seated comfortably at a small table,
you had the opportunity to enjoy a
visual luxury, one which your eyes
are seldom granted. Beautiful young
women...
you imagined that she who would
wear a jacket or a mantle of
“matákia,” if her purse permitted her
to purchase something...




Καθισμένη ἄνετα σ’ ἕνα τραπεζάκι,
εἶχες ν’ ἀπολαμβάνῃς μίαν ὀπτικὴν
πολυτέλειαν, ποὺ σπανίως
χαίρονται τὰ μάτια σου. Ὡραῖες
κοπέλλες...
νόμιζες πὼς ἐκείνη ποὺ θὰ φορῇ μία
ζακέττα ἢ ἕνα μαντὼ ἀπὸ ματάκια,
ἐὰν τὸ βαλάντιόν της ἐπέτρεπε ν’
ἀγοράσῃ κάτ...




   HISTORICAL NOTES
   This image reflects postwar Greek aspirations: even when ownership was rare, fashion consumption as
   spectacle (looking, imagining, desiring) was socially acceptable and encouraged.
   Fur garments were status symbols, particularly in urban Athens, and often showcased in hotels, cafés,
   and salons rather than private homes.
   The casual setting implied by the text (“καθισμένη ἄνετα σ’ ἕνα τραπεζάκι”) underscores how
   luxury fashion entered everyday social spaces.
   Today, this language offers valuable insight into mid-20th-century attitudes toward wealth, femininity,
   and visual pleasure.




                                                     31
                                                                    At the Mousouris Theatre there
                                                                    was held yesterday an evening of
                                                                    models, in which participated Mr.
                                                                    Rap. Kourtídis, the Tsitsópoulos
                                                                    brothers, and others.
                                                                    A new line of Parisian fashion
                                                                    with models. In the photograph
                                                                    are the Misses Mary Pavlatou and
                                                                    Gouléa, mannequins of the House
                                                                    of Tsitsópoulos, who were admired
                                                                    by the public.




                                                                    Εἰς τὸ θέατρον Μουσούρη
                                                                    ἐγένετο χθὲς βραδιὰ μοντέλων,
                                                                    εἰς τὴν ὁποίαν ἔλαβον μέρος ὁ
                                                                    κ. Ραπ. Κουρτίδης, οἱ ἀδελφοὶ
                                                                    Τσιτσόπουλοι κ.ά. Νέα γραμμὴ τῆς
                                                                    παρισινῆς μόδας μὲ μοντέλα. Εἰς
                                                                    τὴν φωτογραφίαν αἱ δίδες Μαίρη
                                                                    Παυλάτου καὶ Γουλέα, μανεκέν τοῦ
                                                                    Οἴκου Τσιτσόπουλου, αἱ ὁποῖαι
                                                                    ἐθαυμάσθησαν ὑπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ.




HISTORICAL NOTES
Hosting fashion shows in theatres reflects the 1950s idea of fashion as spectacle and cultural event, not
merely commerce.
The repeated appearance of Mary Pavlatou across articles confirms her status as a leading mannequin of
the era, trusted to present Parisian lines to Greek audiences.
The Tsitsopoulos House’s presence alongside other designers highlights its central role in postwar Greek
fashion retail and presentation.
Audience approval (“ἠρέθησαν ὑπὸ τοῦ κοινοῦ”) was often explicitly stated—an early form of social
validation before modern fashion criticism.




                                                     32
                                                                Afternoon dress in black …




                                                                Ἀπογευματινὸ φόρεμα ἀπὸ μαῦρο …




HISTORICAL NOTES
By the mid-1950s, black afternoon dresses had become a symbol of urban sophistication in Athens, aligning
Greek fashion with Parisian norms.
Such dresses were designed to transition seamlessly from daytime engagements to early evening
gatherings—an important consideration for women navigating public social life.
The simplicity of the silhouette reflects postwar preferences for refinement over excess, especially outside
strictly evening wear.
Images like this often appeared in women’s columns to educate taste, not merely document fashion.


                                                      34
A simple afternoon dress
made of yellow-and-black
printed fabric.




Ἕνα ἁπλὸ ἀπογευματινὸ
φορεματάκι ἀπὸ κίτρινο
καὶ μαῦρο ἐμπριμέ.




HISTORICAL NOTES
The emphasis on simplicity and success reflects post-war values of elegance without excess, and good taste
achievable through design rather than luxury.
The pairing of a printed dress with a plain, long-line dress in the photographs visually reinforces the text’s
contrast between playful patterns.
This article also shows how French terminology dominated Greek fashion language, reinforcing Greece’s
cultural alignment with Paris rather than Anglo-American fashion.



                                                       35
                                                         Miss Pavlatou, modeling one of the designs
                                                         from the Mallidis collection.




                                                         Ἡ δὶς Παυλάτου, ἐπιδεικνύουσα ἕνα ἀπὸ τὰ
                                                         μοντέλλα τῆς συλλογῆς Μαλλίδου.




HISTORICAL NOTES
Mary Pavlatou appears repeatedly across these articles, indicating she was a prominent professional
mannequin, not merely a casual model.
Her frequent association with leading houses (Mallidis, Tsitsopoulos, etc.) suggests she embodied the ideal
silhouette and deportment of mid-1950s Greek fashion.
The simplicity of the caption reflects a journalistic assumption that readers already recognized her name, a
sign of her visibility in Athenian fashion circles.
Such captions functioned both as documentation and endorsement—linking the designer’s prestige with the
model’s reputation.

                                                    36
          Two charming creations by                                 Δύο χαριτωμένες
          Mrs. Antoniadou, made of                                  ἐμπνεύσεις τῆς κ.
          white and black organza, in a                             Ἀντωνιάδου, ἀπὸ λευκὴ καὶ
          very wide silhouette.                                     μαύρη ὀργάντζα σὲ πολὺ
                                                                    φαρδιὰ γραμμή.

HISTORICAL NOTES
The photograph visually reinforces the caption: one dress in black, one in white, presented as conceptual
counterparts both emphasizing volume rather than body-hugging lines.
This style reflects the mid-1950s transition from austerity to controlled luxury elegance achieved through cut
and fabric rather than embellishment.
Greek fashion houses often showcased paired looks (light/dark) to demonstrate versatility and design coherence.
The use of organza suggests garments intended for formal afternoons cultural events possibly theater or
salon presentations.


                                                      38
                                                                 READY-MADE WOMEN'S
                                                                 DRESSES
                                                                 The mannequin Mary Pavlatou
                                                                 displays a sleeveless summer dress,
                                                                 which is also complemented by a
                                                                 bolero jacket.




                                                                 ΤΑ ΕΤΟΙΜΑ ΓΥΝΑΙΚΕΙΑ
                                                                 ΦΟΡΕΜΑ
                                                                 Τὸ μανεκέν Μαίρη Παυλάτου
                                                                 ἐπιδεικνύει ἕνα καλοκαιρινὸ φόρεμα
                                                                 ἔξωμο ποὺ συμπληρώνεται καὶ μὲ
                                                                 ἕνα μπολερό.




HISTORICAL NOTES
ΤΑ ΕΤΟΙΜΑ ΓΥΝΑΙΚΕΙΑ ΦΟΡΕΜΑΤΑ
This heading indicates the growing importance of mass-produced women’s garments — a key development
in the 1950s Greek consumer market.




                                                  39
                                                                        THE SLIM SILHOUETTE
                                                                        PREVAILS IN THE
                                                                        WINTER COLLECTIONS
                                                                        Fashion Show in Athens
                                                                        Before a small circle of invited
                                                                        guests, the tailoring house
                                                                        Papamichaeloff–Tsamadou
                                                                        presented, on Tuesday and
                                                                        Wednesday morning, a
                                                                        select collection of models.
                                                                        Two exceptionally elegant
                                                                        mannequins, tall and slender
                                                                        in figure—Mary Pavlatou
                                                                        and Corina—displayed for
                                                                        us exquisite dresses in sport,
                                                                        afternoon, and evening styles.
                                                                        The distinguishing feature of this
                                                                        fashion house is that the fabrics
                                                                        used for its models are European,
                                                                        of admirable quality. Black
                                                                        predominated in the collection
                                                                        shown the day before yesterday,
                                                                        as did grey. Here and there, a
                                                                        vivid, luminous red, in the form
                                                                        of a small “petite robe” made of
                                                                        jersey, pleasantly broke up the
                                                                        dark ensembles.




ΕΠΙΚΡΑΤΕΙ Ἡ ΣΤΕΝΗ ΓΡΑΜΜΗ
ΣΤΙΣ ΧΕΙΜΕΡΙΝΕΣ ΣΥΛΛΟΓΕΣ
ΕΠΙΔΕΙΞΙΣ ΜΟΔΑΣ ΣΤΑΣ ΑΘΗΝΑΣ
Ἐνώπιον στενοῦ κύκλου προσκεκλημένων ὁ ραπτικὸς οἶκος Παπαμιχαήλωφ – Τσαμαδοῦ
ἐπέδειξε τὴν Τρίτη καὶ τὴν Τετάρτη τὸ πρωῒ μία ἐκλεκτὴ συλλογὴ μοντέλλων. Δύο κομψότατα
μανεκέν μὲ ψηλὲς καὶ λυγερὲς κορμοστασιές, ἡ Μαίρη Παυλάτου καὶ ἡ Κορίνα, μᾶς ἔδειξαν
ὡραιότατα φορέματα σὲ τύπο σπορ, ἀπογευματινὰ καὶ βραδυνά.
Τὸ χαρακτηριστικὸ τοῦ ραπτικοῦ αὐτοῦ οἴκου εἶναι ὅτι τὰ ὑφάσματα ποὺ μεταχειρίζεται γιὰ
τὰ μοντέλλα εἶναι εὐρωπαϊκὰ σὲ θαυμασία ποιότητα. Τὸ μαῦρο χρῶμα ἐπικρατοῦσε στὴν
προχθεσινὴ συλλογὴ καθὼς καὶ τὸ γκρί. Ποὺ καὶ ποὺ ἕνα ζωηρὸ φωτεινὸ κόκκινο, ὑπὸ τὸν τύπο
μικρᾶς «πτὶ ρομπ» ἀπὸ ζερσέϋ, ἔσπαζε εὐχάριστα τὰ σκοτεινὰ σύνολα.


HISTORICAL NOTES
The mention of European fabrics signals postwar re-entry of Greek fashion houses into international supply
chains. Shows held in the morning and for invited guests only reflect: couture-style presentation not retail
shows, but prestige demonstrations.
Naming mannequins (Pavlatou, Corina) indicates the rise of celebrity models in Greece fashion personalities
recognized by name.

                                                     40
                                                                    FASHION – HOME
                                                                    Hat Model
                                                                    An elegant hat from the house of
                                                                    Archontaki–Kallergi, made of beige
                                                                    felt with black velvet trim.
                                                                    Model: Rose Valois.
                                                                    Mannequin: Mary Pavlatou.




                                                                    ΜΟΔΑ – ΣΠΙΤΙ
                                                                    ΜΟΝΤΕΛΟ ΚΑΠΕΛΛΟΥ
                                                                    Ὡραῖον τὸ καπέλλο τοῦ οἴκου
                                                                    Ἀρχοντάκη — Καλλέργη ἀπὸ μπὲζ
                                                                    πλάκα μὲ μαῦρο βελούδακι.
                                                                    Μοντέλο Ρὸζ Βαλουά.
                                                                    Μανεκέν Μαίρη Παυλάτου.




HISTORICAL NOTES
The heading signals a shift from haute couture / custom tailoring to ready-to-wear, a major development in
Greek fashion during the 1950s.
Such sections were aimed at middle- and upper-middle-class women consumers seeking fashionable but
accessible garments.
The presence of well-known mannequins (like Mary Pavlatou) elevated ready-made fashion to couture prestige.


                                                    42
HAT COLLECTION                                            ΣΥΛΛΟΓΗ ΚΑΠΕΛΛΩΝ
House of Kallergi–Archontaki                              Οἴκου Καλλέργη – Ἀρχοντάκη
The spring hat collection of the long-established         Ἡ συλλογή ἀνοίξτικων καπέλλων τοῦ
house of Kallergi–Archontaki once again presents          παλαιοῦ οἴκου κ. Καλλέργη – Ἀρχοντάκη
great variety and richness.                               παρουσιάζει καὶ φέτος μεγάλη ποικιλία καὶ
                                                          πλοῦτο.
Hats of every kind, for dressy and sport wear
alike, were seen in this beautiful collection,            Καπέλλα ὅλων τῶν εἰδῶν, ἁπτιγιέ καὶ
selected with the greatest care from the most             σπορ, εἴδαμε στὴν ὡραία αὐτὴ συλλογή
renowned Parisian houses.                                 διαλεγμένα μὲ τὴν μεγαλυτέραν προσοχὴν
                                                          ἀπὸ τοὺς γνωστότερους παρισινοὺς οἴκους.
In the photographs you see two of these hats,
presented by the mannequin Mary Pavlatou                  Στὶς φωτογραφίες βλέπετε δύο ἀπὸ τὰ
(photograph by Patridis).                                 καπέλλα αὐτά, παρουσιασμένα ἀπὸ τὸ
                                                          μανεκέν Μαίρη Παυλάτου (φωτογραφία
                                                          Πατρίδη).
HISTORICAL NOTES
This article dates from the golden age of Athenian couture journalism (early–mid 1950s).
Hats were essential for respectable public appearance, markers of class and taste, and often imported or
Paris-inspired even when locally assembled.

                                                     43
   Three models of spring dresses that were presented at the fashion show at the “King George.”


Τρία μοντέλα ανοιξιάτικων φορεμάτων που παρουσιάσθηκαν στη επίδειξη του «Κινγκ Τζώρτζ».




HISTORICAL NOTES
ανοιξιάτικων φορεμάτων = spring dresses, indicating seasonal collections rather than one-off designs.
παρουσιάσθηκαν (older spelling) reflects formal journalistic Greek of the mid-20th century.
«Κινγκ Τζώρτζ» (King George) refers to the Hotel Grande Bretagne’s King George venue in Athens, a
prestigious location frequently used for elite fashion shows and society events during the 1940s–1950s.
The caption emphasizes the venue rather than the designer, underscoring how place functioned as a marker
of fashion authority and social status in postwar Athens.



                                                    44
46
Our country does not possess a single mannequin…
Most of the foreign men and women who visit Greece express their admiration
for the grace and elegance displayed in the dress of Greek women—and more
than all others, Athenian women.
“Dressmakers here must be great artists,” a foreign journalist who recently
visited our city told us. “I would very much like to meet some of them and ask
how they manage to conceive and create so many masterpieces of their kind.
But,” she added, “I fear that I would not be able to communicate with them,
since they likely do not speak foreign languages.”…


Η ΧΩΡΑ ΜΑΣ ΔΕΝ ΔΙΑΘΕΤΕΙ ΚΑΝΕΝΑ ΜΑΝΝΈΚΕΝ…
Οἱ περισσότεροι ἀπὸ τοὺς ξένους καὶ τὶς ξένες ποὺ ἐπισκέπτονται τὴν Ἑλλάδα
ἐκφράζουν τὸν θαυμασμό τους γιὰ τὴν χάρη καὶ τὴν κομψότητα, ποὺ ἔχουν
στὸ ντύσιμό τους οἱ Ἑλληνίδες καὶ περισσότερο ἀπὸ ὅλες οἱ Ἀθηναῖες.
— Οἱ μοδίστρες πρέπει νὰ εἶναι μεγάλες καλλιτέχνιδες — μᾶς ἔλεγε
τελευταία μιὰ ξένη δημοσιογράφος, ποὺ εἶχε ἐπισκεφθῇ τὴν πόλη μας.
Θὰ ἤθελα πολὺ νὰ γνωρίσω μερικὲς ἀπὸ αὐτὲς καὶ νὰ τὶς ρωτήσω πῶς
κατορθώνουν καὶ σκαρώνουν τόσα ἀριστουργήματα τοῦ εἴδους τους. Ἀλλὰ
προσθέτει — φοβᾶμαι, ὅτι δὲν θὰ μπορέσω νὰ συνεννοηθῶ μαζί τους, ἐπειδὴ
ἄλλωστε δὲν θὰ γνωρίζουν ξένες γλῶσσες.

Caption
A Greek mannequin presents a latest creation by a Greek fashion house.
Ἕνα ἑλληνικὸ μανεκέν λανσάρει μιὰ τελευταία κρεασιόν ἑλληνικοῦ Οἴκου μόδας.




HISTORICAL NOTES
This article is programmatic: it argues for the recognition of Greek fashion as a serious art
form, not merely craftsmanship.
The repeated use of καλλιτέχνιδες (female artists) elevates seamstresses beyond laborers
to creators.
The tension between client taste vs. designer authority mirrors debates occurring
simultaneously in Paris and Rome.
Language ability (French/English) is treated as a marker of modern professionalism,
reflecting postwar Greece’s cultural reorientation toward Europe.
The photo reinforces the thesis visually: a tailored, modern silhouette presented by a Greek
model—asserting national capability.




                                            47
Caption
Miss Mary Pavlatou as she models an evening gown.
Ἡ δὶς Μαίρη Παυλάτου ἐνῷ ἐπιδεικνύει μιὰ τουαλέττα.

                           48
An Unexpected Interview at the Offices of Apogevmatini
“How I Became the First Greek Certified Mannequin!”
Miss Mary Pavlatou, who studied at a specialized school in Chicago,
reveals to us the secrets of her success.
The Beauty Industry of the “Beau–Lydas–Model”

The discovery of the certified mannequin came to us entirely unexpectedly. As though driven by some
sudden force, we found ourselves heading toward the offices of Apogevmatini to seek certain information.
As we entered the great hall—where elegance blended harmoniously with gracious refinement—an idea
suddenly crossed our minds: This must be her…
And indeed it was her. She stood out distinctly among thousands of other beautiful Athenian women—not
merely because of her walk. There are, of course, many graceful and attractive women in Athens, with
fine figures and imposing presence, whom one sees strolling along the streets and instinctively admires
for their elegance and their bearing.
But the young woman we encountered at that moment was not merely walking—she was moving. Her
gestures were harmonious, her carriage composed.
“Excuse me…” she began to say. “I would like some information…”
“No—please excuse us, madam, if we are being intrusive. Are you a mannequin?”
“Yes,” she replied. “How did you know? Do you attend fashion shows?”
“No. And at the moment, to tell you the truth, I do not follow them.”
The beautiful eyes of the unknown woman fixed us with a serious, almost severe gaze—one that seemed
to suggest we had misunderstood her intentions. She perhaps believed that we were trying to sell her
something…
“Forgive me…” she began again. “I was simply looking for some information.”
“No—please allow us. You are a mannequin?”
“Yes.”
“And a certified one, at that.”
“Yes,” she answered calmly.
And this, indeed, was what distinguished her. She was not merely a beautiful woman chosen at random
to display garments; she was a trained professional, a woman who had studied her craft methodically,
seriously, and with discipline.
Miss Mary Pavlatou—this was her name—had studied at a specialized school in Chicago, where
the profession of mannequin is treated as a science and an art, governed by rules, technique, and
psychological understanding.
There, she learned not only how to walk, but how to move; not only how to wear a dress, but how to
interpret it; not merely how to display fabric, but how to express mood, rhythm, and character through
posture and gesture.
“In America,” she told us, “the mannequin is not an ornament. She is a collaborator of the designer. She
must understand the garment as well as the tailor who created it.”
The mannequin, she explained, must possess discipline, endurance, and intelligence. She must know
how to control her body completely—how to stop, how to turn, how to pause—because every movement
is a message.
And yet, despite the seriousness of the profession abroad, in Greece it is still misunderstood. Many believe
that beauty alone is enough. But beauty, she insists, is only the beginning.
“There are many beautiful women,” she said, “but very few mannequins.”


                                                    49
Her certification, earned through rigorous examinations, made her the first Greek woman to receive an
official diploma in this profession—an achievement that opened doors not only in Athens but abroad.
She has appeared in major fashion shows, represented prominent fashion houses, and introduced to
Greek audiences a new standard of professionalism—one that elevates fashion from spectacle to art.




ΑΠΡΟΟΠΤΟ ΙΝΤΕΡΒΙΟΥ ΣΤΑ ΓΡΑΦΕΙΑ ΤΗΣ «ΑΠΟΓΕΥΜΑΤΙΝΗΣ»
«ΕΤΣΙ ΕΓΙΝΑ Η ΠΡΩΤΗ ΕΛΛΗΝΙΣ ΔΙΠΛΩΜΑΤΟΥΧΟΣ ΜΑΝΝΕΚΕΝ»!
Ἡ δὶς Μαίρη Παυλάτου ποὺ ἐφοίτησε σὲ εἰδικὴ σχολὴ τοῦ Σικάγου,
μᾶς ἀποκαλύπτει τὰ μυστικὰ τῆς ἐπιτυχίας
Η ΒΙΟΜΗΧΑΝΙΑ ΟΜΟΡΦΙΑΣ ΤΗΣ «ΜΠΙΟΥ-ΛΑΪΝΤΑΣ-ΜΟΝΤΕΛ»
Ἡ ἀνακάλυψις τῆς διπλωματοῦχου μανεκέν ὑπῆρξεν ἐντελῶς ἀπρόοπτος. Ὡς ἐὰν ἀοράτου τινὸς δυνάμεως
ὠθούσης ἡμᾶς, ἐφθάσαμεν εἰς τὰ γραφεῖα τῆς «Ἀπογευματινῆς» πρὸς ἀναζήτησιν ὀλίγων πληροφοριῶν.
Εἰσερχόμενοι εἰς τὴν μεγαλοπρεπῆ αἴθουσαν, ὅπου ἡ χάρις συνεζευγμένη μετὰ τῆς κομψότητος ἐπικρατεῖ,
ἐπέρασεν αἰφνιδίως ἐκ τοῦ νοὸς ἡμῶν ἡ σκέψις· «Αὕτη ὀφείλει νὰ εἶναι…»
Καὶ πράγματι ἦτο αὕτη. Ἐξεχώριζεν ἀμέσως ἀνάμεσα εἰς χιλιάδας ἄλλας ὡραίας Ἀθηναίας, οὐχὶ μόνον διὰ
τὸ βάδισμά της. Διότι, ἀναμφισβητήτως, ἡ Ἀθήνα διαθέτει πλῆθος χαριτωμένων καὶ καλλιπρεπῶν γυναικῶν,
μετ’ εὐσταθοῦς ἀναστήματος καὶ ἐπιβλητικῆς παρουσίας.
Ἡ νέᾱ, ὅμως, τὴν ὁποίαν συναντήσαμεν, δὲν ἐβάδιζεν ἁπλῶς· ἐκινείτο. Αἱ κινήσεις της ἦσαν ἁρμονικαί, ἡ
στάσις της μετρημένη, ἡ ὅλη ἐμφάνισίς της ἐμαρτύρει πειθαρχίαν καὶ ἔλεγχον.
«Συγχωρήσατέ με…» ἤρξατο λέγουσα. «Θα ἤθελον τινὰς πληροφορίας…»
«Μὴ μᾶς συγχωρεῖτε, δεσποινίς, ἐὰν φαίνεταί τι ἀδιάκριτον· εἶσθε μανεκέν;»
«Ναί», ἀπεκρίθη. «Πῶς τὸ ἐμαντεύσατε; Παρακολουθεῖτε τὰς ἐπιδείξεις μόδας;»
«Οὔτε αὐτὸ—καὶ τὴν στιγμήν ταύτην, εἰλικρινῶς, δὲν τὰς παρακολουθῶ.»
Τὰ ὡραῖα μάτια τῆς ἀγνώστου μᾶς ἐπεσκίασαν διὰ στιγμῆς μὲ βλέμμα αὐστηρόν, ὡς ἐὰν ἐφοβεῖτο μήπως τὴν
παρεξηγήσαμεν. Ἴσως ἐνόμισε ὅτι ἐπεχειροῦμεν νὰ τῆς προσφέρωμεν τι.
«Συγχωρήσατέ με…» ἐπανέλαβε. «Ἐζήτουν μόνον πληροφορίας.»
«Παρακαλοῦμεν· εἶσθε μανεκέν;»



                                                   50
«Ναί.»
«Καὶ μάλιστα διπλωματοῦχος;»
«Ναί», ἀπεκρίθη ἡρέμως.
Καὶ τοῦτο ἀκριβῶς ἦτο τὸ στοιχεῖον ὅπερ τὴν διεκρίνε. Δὲν ἦτο μία τυχαία ὡραία γυναίκα ἐπιλεγείσα διὰ
νὰ ἐπιδεικνύῃ φορέματα· ἦτο ἐπαγγελματίας, ἐκπαιδευθεῖσα μεθοδικῶς, σοβαρῶς καὶ ἐπιστημονικῶς.
Ἡ δεσποινὶς Μαίρη Παυλάτου, τοῦτο ἦτο τὸ ὄνομά της, εἶχεν φοιτήσει εἰς εἰδικὴν σχολὴν τοῦ Σικάγου,
ὅπου τὸ ἐπάγγελμα τῆς μανεκέν θεωρεῖται τέχνη καὶ ἐπιστήμη, ὑπακούουσα εἰς κανόνας, τεχνικὴν καὶ
ψυχολογικὴν κατάρτισιν.
Ἐκεῖ ἔμαθεν οὐ μόνον πῶς νὰ βαδίζῃ, ἀλλὰ πῶς νὰ κινῆται· οὐ μόνον πῶς νὰ φορεῖ ἕν ἔνδυμα, ἀλλὰ πῶς
νὰ τὸ ἐρμηνεύῃ· οὐχὶ μόνον πῶς νὰ ἐπιδεικνύῃ ὕφασμα, ἀλλὰ πῶς νὰ μεταδίδῃ ρυθμόν, διάθεσιν καὶ
χαρακτῆρα διὰ τῆς στάσεως καὶ τῆς κινήσεως.
«Ἐν Ἀμερικῇ», μᾶς εἶπεν, «ἡ μανεκέν δὲν εἶναι κόσμημα. Εἶναι συνεργάτις τοῦ δημιουργοῦ. Ὀφείλει νὰ
κατανοῇ τὸ ἔνδυμα ὡς καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ ῥάπτης ὁ δημιουργήσας αὐτό.»
Ἡ μανεκέν, κατὰ τὰ λεγόμενά της, ὀφείλει νὰ διαθέτῃ πειθαρχίαν, ἀντοχήν καὶ νόησιν. Ὀφείλει νὰ ἐλέγχη
τελείως τὸ σῶμά της—πῶς νὰ σταθῇ, πῶς νὰ στραφῇ, πῶς νὰ παύσῃ—διότι πᾶσα κίνησις ἀποτελεῖ
μήνυμα.
Καίτοι δὲ, τὸ ἐπάγγελμα τοῦτο τυγχάνει σοβαρᾶς ἀντιμετωπίσεως εἰς τὸ ἐξωτερικόν, ἐν Ἑλλάδι
παραμένει παρεξηγημένον. Πολλοὶ πιστεύουσιν ὅτι ἡ ὡραιότης αὐτάρκης εἶναι. Ἀλλ’ ἡ ὡραιότης, κατὰ
τὴν ἴδιαν, ἀποτελεῖ μόνον τὴν ἀρχήν.
«Ὑπάρχουν πολλαὶ ὡραῖαι γυναῖκες», εἶπεν· «ὀλίγαι ὅμως μανεκέν.»
Τὸ δίπλωμά της, ἀποκτηθὲν κατόπιν αὐστηρῶν ἐξετάσεων, τὴν κατέστησεν τὴν πρώτην Ἑλληνίδα
διπλωματοῦχον μανεκέν—ἐπίτευγμα ὅπερ ἤνοιξε δι’ αὐτὴν πύλας οὐ μόνον ἐν Ἀθήναις, ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰς τὸ
ἐξωτερικόν.
Ἔλαβε μέρος εἰς μεγάλας ἐπιδείξεις μόδας, ἐκπροσώπησε γνωστούς οἴκους καὶ παρεχώρησε τῷ
ἑλληνικῷ κοινοῦ νέον μέτρον ἐπαγγελματισμοῦ, ἀναβαθμίζουσα τὴν μόδαν ἀπὸ θέαμα εἰς τέχνην.
Ἐρωτηθεῖσα περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος τῆς ἑλληνικῆς μόδας, ἐξέφρασεν ἀκλόνητον πεποίθησιν. Οἱ Ἕλληνες
δημιουργοὶ, κατ’ αὐτήν, διαθέτουσι φαντασίαν, αἴσθησιν καὶ τεχνικὴν ἰσάξιαν τῶν εὐρωπαϊκῶν.
Ἐκεῖνο ὅπερ ἀπαιτεῖται, ἐτόνισεν, εἶναι ἡ συνεργασία μὲ καταρτισμένας μανεκέν—γυναῖκας αἵτινες
κατανοοῦσιν τὴν εὐθύνην, τὸν ρυθμὸν καὶ τὴν παρουσίασιν.
«Ἡ μανεκέν», κατέληξεν, «δὲν ὑπάρχει διὰ νὰ προβάλλῃ τὸ πρόσωπόν της, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἔνδυμα. Ἐὰν τὸ
κοινὸν ἐνθυμεῖται ἐμέ καὶ οὐχὶ τὸ φόρεμα, τότε ἔχω ἀποτύχει.»




HISTORICAL NOTES
“Διπλωματούχος μανεκέν” This is crucial: it means certified or credentialed mannequin. In the early 1950s,
modeling was beginning to professionalize internationally. Pavlatou is presented not as decorative talent but as a
trained professional, with formal education in Chicago.
The mention of Chicago signals American modernity, discipline, and professionalism, lending prestige and international
legitimacy to her career—especially significant in postwar Greece.
Pavlatou is framed as confident, educated and self-aware. She represents a new Greek woman: internationally trained,
professionally certified, and publicly articulate.



                                                           51
                                                                   A coat of genuine ocelot fur.
                                                                   Brown hat adorned with two
                                                                   bird-of-paradise feathers.
                                                                   All the familiar names that so often
                                                                   appear in the society columns of the
                                                                   newspapers, seated at tastefully arranged
                                                                   small tables, created the impression
                                                                   of a social gathering rather than a
                                                                   fashion show.
                                                                   The true purpose of the assembly was
                                                                   brought back into focus by the special
                                                                   runway—constructed like a bridge—set
                                                                   up in the center of the hall, along which
                                                                   the mannequins paraded.
                                                                   Before speaking of the most significant
                                                                   achievements of “Halifax,” we shall
                                                                   attempt, in a few words, to outline the
                                                                   general characteristics…



                                                                   Παλτό ἀπὸ ὀσελότ βεριτάμπλ.
                                                                   Καπέλλο καφέ μὲ δύο
                                                                   παραδεισία φτερά.
                                                                   Ὅλα τὰ γνωστὰ ὀνόματα ποὺ
                                                                   τόσο συχνὰ φιγουράρουν στὶς
                                                                   κοσμικὲς στήλες τῶν ἐφημερίδων,
                                                                   διαμοιρασμένα στὰ ὡραῖα
                                                                   τοποθετημένα τραπεζάκια,
                                                                   ἔδιναν τὴν ἐντύπωση κοσμικῆς
                                                                   συναναστροφῆς καὶ ὄχι ἐπιδείξεως
                                                                   μόδας.
                                                                   Στὴ πραγματικὴ αἰτία τῆς
                                                                   συγκεντρώσεως μᾶς ξανάφερνε
                                                                   ἡ ἐν εἴδει γέφυρας, εἰδικὴ ἐξέδρα,
                                                                   στημένη στὸ μέσον τῆς αἰθούσης,
                                                                   ὅπου παρέλασαν τὰ μανεκέν.
                                                                   Πρὶν μιλήσουμε γιὰ τὶς
                                                                   σπουδαιότερες ἐπιτεύξεις τοῦ
                                                                   “Χάλιφαξ” θὰ προσπαθήσουμε μὲ
                                                                   λίγα λόγια νὰ δώσωμε τὶς γενικὲς
                                                                   γραμμές…
HISTORICAL NOTES
The description reflects postwar Athenian elite culture, where fashion shows doubled as high-society events.
μανεκέν (from French mannequin) was the standard term for fashion models.
The “bridge-like runway” is an early reference to catwalk staging in Greece.
“Χάλιφαξ” (Halifax) likely refers to a coat or fur collection, not the city—frequently used as a trade or
collection name in Greek fashion journalism of the period.
The prose deliberately blurs social ritual and artistic presentation, a hallmark of Katharevousa-influenced
fashion writing.

                                                      52
                                                                   An evening gown by Balmain,
                                                                   rose-pink, richly embroidered, is
                                                                   presented by Mary Pavlatou of the
                                                                   fashion house of Mrs. Stantzou.




                                                                   Βραδινὸ φόρεμα τοῦ Μπαλμαὶν ρόζ
                                                                   ντυσὲς κεντημένο, παρουσιάζει
                                                                   ἡ Μαίρη Παυλάτου τοῦ ραπτικοῦ
                                                                   οἴκου τῆς κ. Στάντζου




HISTORICAL NOTES
The mention of Balmain (Pierre Balmain, Paris) is significant. In the late 1940s–1950s, Greek couture houses
frequently adapted or licensed Parisian designs, especially from Balmain, Dior, and Jacques Fath. These
garments were either legally reproduced from Paris originals, or locally interpreted “after Balmain” (κατ’
ἐμπνευσίν).
Balmain’s style—structured elegance, narrow waistlines, and refined luxury—was especially admired in Athens’
upper social circles.
The caption credits the fashion house of Mrs. Stantzou (κ. Στάντζου). During this era, women-owned
couture ateliers were central to Greek fashion. They functioned as translators of Parisian couture into
Greek craftsmanship, arbiters of taste for the Athenian elite, employers of highly skilled embroiderers and
seamstresses.
Such houses often presented their work through newspaper fashion pages rather than formal runway shows.

                                                    54
Our reporter, Mr. G. Pilikos, found the opportunity to ride in the newspaper’s
automobile to the garden of ETAM and to chat briefly with its lovely “flowers,”
Miss Mary Pavlatou and Miss Thetis Grapha.


Ὁ συντάκτης τῆς ἐφημερίδος ἡμῶν κ. Γ. Πηλικός εὗρεν τὴν εὐκαιρίαν νὰ
ἐπιβῇ εἰς τὸ αὐτοκίνητον τῆς «Ἀπογευματινῆς» καὶ νὰ περιηγηθῇ τὸν κῆπον
τῆς ΕΤΑΜ, συνομιλήσας ὀλίγον μετὰ τῶν ὡραίων «λουλουδιῶν» του, τὰς
δεσποινίδας Μαίρην Παυλάτου καὶ Θέτιδα Γράφα.




                                        55
56
 “‘Bouquet.’ A dress made of printed taffeta and a short jacket
 (bolero) of black and grey taffeta.
 A black skirt with enormous red rose appliqués and a black blouse. These, of course,
 were only a few among the eighty beautiful ensembles presented by the ‘ETAM’
 company. In general terms, the collection favored full skirts and blouses, many
 boleros, and one innovation: elastic belts in all color variations. It is a fact, however,
 that all those who attended these inspired presentations of this Greek dressmaking
 firm remained thoroughly impressed by the progress it has achieved in recent years.”
 — Iolanta Androulidaki




 «“Μπουκέτο”. Φόρεμα ἐξ ἐμπριμέ ταφτᾶ καὶ κοντὸν πανωφόριον
 (μπολερό) ἐκ ταφτᾶ μέλανος καὶ φαιοῦ.
 Φοῦστα μέλαινα μετὰ τεραστίων ῥοδίνων ἐρυθρῶν τριαντάφυλλων καὶ μέλαινα
 μπλούζα. Ταῦτα, βεβαίως, ἀπετέλουν μόνον ὀλίγα ἐκ τῶν ὀγδοήκοντα καλλίστων
 συνόλων, ἃ παρεσίασεν ἡ «ἘΤΑΜ». Κατὰ γενικὰς γραμμὰς, ἡ συλλογὴ ἐπροτίμα
 τὰς πλουσίας φοῦστας καὶ τὰς μπλούζας, πλείστα μπολερό, καὶ μίαν καινοτομίαν·
 τὰς ἐλαστικὰς ζώνας εἰς πάσας τὰς χρωματικὰς παραλλαγάς. Εἶναι δὲ γεγονὸς ὅτι
 πάντες ὅσοι παρηκολούθησαν τὰς ἐμπνευσμένας ταύτας ἐπιδείξεις τῆς Ἑλληνικῆς
 ταύτης ἐταιρείας φορεμάτων ἔμειναν κατενθουσιασμένοι διὰ τὴν πρόοδον, ἣν
 ἐσημείωσεν κατὰ τὰ τελευταία ἔτη.»**
 — Ἰολάντα Ἀνδρουλιδάκη




HISTORICAL NOTES
The title «Μπουκέτο» (“Bouquet”) reflects a mid-century fashion convention of naming
ensembles poetically, emphasizing visual abundance and ornamental richness, especially when
floral appliqués were central.
The mention of elastic belts in all colors is significant: elastic textiles were still relatively novel
in fashion, they signaled modernity, comfort, and adaptability, and aligned Greek fashion with
international postwar trends emphasizing wearability.
ETAM (ΕΤΑΜ) was among the Greek ready-to-wear firms striving to professionalize fashion
production, adapt Parisian couture ideas for Greek consumers, and assert a national fashion
identity during postwar reconstruction.
An 80-piece presentation indicates a large-scale, ambitious show by Greek standards of the time.




                                                   57
                                                         THE LATEST MODELS FOR
                                                         SPRING PARISIAN FASHION IN
                                                         ATHENS!
                                                         Impressions from the fashion
                                                         shows of the dressmaking house
                                                         of Mrs. Sofia Mallidou.
                                                         The mannequins captivated the
                                                         audience.
                                                         BLUE WAS THE DOMINANT
                                                         COLOR EVERYWHERE
                                                         The spring fashion shows — among the
                                                         most successful artistic expressions of
                                                         fashion toward the end of the season —
                                                         concluded with the presentation of the Etam
                                                         collection, organized for the 27th of the
                                                         current month.
                                                         Throughout this season, from the first to the
                                                         final showing, Mrs. Mallidou’s presentation
                                                         stood out. Within a refined atmosphere,
                                                         two charming mannequins, the Misses
                                                         Mary Pavlatou and Marina, presented the
                                                         models with such elegance that no attentive
                                                         observer could fail to notice them.
                                                      But it was not only the elegance of the
                                                      presentation that drew attention — it was
                                                      also the journalistic eye of the observer,
                                                      which focused on the purity of the lines,
                                                      the clarity of the cut, and the refined
                                                      harmony achieved through certain color
                                                      combinations. One could state without
                                                      exaggeration that the Mallidou fashion
house presented one of the most accomplished spring collections of the season.
Blue was the dominant color throughout the presentation, shown in luminous tones combined with
white detailing — particularly noticeable in necklines and sleeves.
Among the most successful creations were light, meticulously crafted applications of detail,
especially evident in a superb grey dress made of alpaca fabric, which appeared radiant when worn,
with two contrasting white elements — the dress’s cut forming a harmonious vertical line that
imparted movement and revealed an inner structure derived from the fabric itself.
All the fabrics used by Mrs. Mallidou were primarily linen, alpaca, natté, and organza. We admired
an English-style evening dress in rose gold with a scatter of roses, a creation by Dior.
The large sweetheart neckline appeared repeatedly — without monotony — on both dresses and
blouses, lending a particular charm through the elegance of its shaping.
Especially graceful were the white dresses in delicate piqué fabric, embroidered with fine details.
The collection concluded with evening gowns distinguished by their refined execution and luxurious
simplicity.
Noteworthy were also the technical details in the evening dress by Dior, crafted from black velvet
with embroidered roses, as well as a taffeta skirt paired with a fitted blouse.
All in all, those who attended these inspired presentations of Greek fashion left thoroughly
impressed by the progress achieved in recent years.

                                                  58
ΤΑ ΤΕΛΕΥΤΑΙΑ ΜΟΝΤΕΛΑ ΔΙΑ ΤΗΝ ΑΝΟΙΞΙΝ
Η ΠΑΡΙΣΙΝΗ ΜΟΔΑ ΕΙΣ ΤΑΣ ΑΘΗΝΑΣ

Εντυπώσεις εκ των επιδείξεων του ραπτικού οίκου της κ. Σοφίας Μαλλίδου.
Τα μανεκέν εμάγευσαν το κοινόν.

ΤΟ ΜΠΛΕ ΧΡΩΜΑ ΕΚΥΡΙΑΡΧΗΣΕ ΠΑΝΤΟΥ

Αι ανοιξιάτικαι επιδείξεις μόδας — εκ των επιτυχεστέρων καλλιτεχνικών εκφράσεων της
εποχής — εστέφθησαν υπό πλήρους επιτυχίας διά της παρουσιάσεως της συλλογής της
«Ετάμ», οργανωθείσης διά την 27ην του τρέχοντος μηνός.
Καθ’ όλην την διάρκειαν της εφετινής περιόδου, από της πρώτης έως και της τελευταίας
εμφανίσεως, η παρουσίασις του οίκου Μαλλίδου διεκρίθη ιδιαιτέρως. Εντός εκλεπτυσμένης
ατμοσφαίρας, δύο χαριτωμένα μανεκέν, αι δεσποινίδες Μαίρη Παυλάτου και Μαρίνα, επέδειξαν
τα μοντέλα μετά τοιαύτης κομψότητος, ώστε ουδείς προσεκτικός παρατηρητής ηδύνατο να
παραμείνη ασυγκίνητος.
Πλην όμως, ου μόνον η χάρις της επιδείξεως προσήλκυσε την προσοχήν, αλλά και η ακρίβεια
του δημοσιογραφικού βλέμματος, το οποίον εστράφη προς την καθαρότητα της γραμμής, την
σαφήνειαν της κοπής και την αρμονίαν των χρωματικών συνδυασμών. Άνευ υπερβολής δύναταί
τις να διακηρύξη ότι ο οίκος Μαλλίδου παρουσίασε μίαν εκ των αρτιωτέρων ανοιξιάτικων
συλλογών.
Το μπλε χρώμα απετέλεσε το κυρίαρχον στοιχείον καθ’ όλην την παρουσίασιν, εμφανιζόμενον
εις φωτεινάς αποχρώσεις μετά λευκών λεπτομερειών, ιδίως εις τους λαιμούς και τα μανίκια.
Εκ των επιτυχέστερων δημιουργημάτων ανεδείχθησαν αι λεπταί και επιμελώς επεξεργασμέναι
εφαρμογαί, κυρίως εις ένα θαυμάσιον γκρίζον φόρεμα εξ αλπάκας, το οποίον ελάμπρυνεν την
εμφάνισιν, με δύο λευκά αντιθετικά στοιχεία, σχηματίζοντα κομψήν κάθετον γραμμήν.
Τα υφάσματα τα χρησιμοποιηθέντα υπό της κ. Μαλλίδου ήσαν κυρίως λινά, αλπάκας, ναττέ και
οργάντζα. Ιδιαιτέρως εθαυμάσθη αγγλικόν βραδυνόν φόρεμα ροζ χρυσίζον, διασπαρμένον με
ρόδα, δημιουργία του Ντιόρ.
Το μεγάλο ντεκολτέ καρδίαν επανεμφανίζεται επανειλημμένως, άνευ μονοτονίας, τόσον εις
φορέματα όσον και εις μπλούζας, προσδίδον ιδιαιτέραν χάριν.
Εξαιρέτως χαριτωμένα υπήρξαν τα λευκά φορέματα εκ λεπτού πικέ, πλουσίως κεντημένα.
Η συλλογή εκλείσθη διά βραδινών ενδυμάτων διακρινομένων διά την άρτιαν επεξεργασίαν και
την πολυτελή απλότητα.
Αξιοσημείωτοι υπήρξαν και αι τεχνικαί λεπτομέρειαι του βραδινού φορέματος του Ντιόρ, εκ
μαύρου βελούδου με κεντημένα ρόδα, ως και η φούστα εκ ταφτά μετά εφαρμοστής μπλούζας.
Εν γένει, άπαντες όσοι παρηκολούθησαν τας εμπνευσμένας ταύτας επιδείξεις της ελληνικής
μόδας απεχώρησαν βαθύτατα εντυπωσιασμένοι εκ της προόδου των τελευταίων ετών.




HISTORICAL NOTES
Parisian influence: The article reflects postwar Greece’s strong admiration for Parisian couture, with Dior
serving as a benchmark of taste and modernity.
Blue as dominant color: Blue symbolized elegance, renewal, and restraint in early-1950s fashion, aligning with
postwar aesthetic sensibilities.
Mannequins as cultural figures: Models such as Mary Pavlatou were treated as cultural ambassadors, not
merely fashion figures.
Katharevousa style: The elevated register mirrors the aspirational tone of Greek society during the period,
linking fashion with cultural prestige.

                                                     59
The new line of Fath: a dress of black velvet
in a straight silhouette, with puffed sleeves,
trimmed with pink roses.




Ἡ καινούργια γραμμὴ τοῦ Φάτ· φόρεμα
ἀπὸ μαῦρο βελούδινο σὲ ἴσια γραμμὴ μὲ
φούσκα μανίκια, ποὺ γαρνίρονται μὲ ρόζ
τριαντάφυλλα.




HISTORICAL NOTES
The reference to a straight silhouette reflects the early–mid 1950s shift away from extreme post-war
fullness toward cleaner, more restrained lines, influenced by Paris couture houses such as Balmain and early
Givenchy.
In Greece, velvet gowns were typically reserved for soirées, embassy events, and formal theatre evenings.
This combination was highly fashionable in the early 1950s and frequently appeared in Athenian couture
adaptations of Paris models.

                                                     60
